---
title: Vintage Computer Festival East
layout: post
---

I attended the Vintage Computer Festival for the first time and it was such a compelling experience that I felt! the need to write it up. So here goes!

This was such a wonderful experience! I went with a friend, [Tiffany Tseng](https://twitter.com/scientiffic) and we were initially worried about what the crowd was like. It is not usual to be the only young women of color in a tech event, especially one focused on an earlier decade. It's with great relief that I say everyone we talked to was nice, friendly and was very excited to share their knowledge about vintage computers!

Most of the exhibitors I met were engineers and hobbyists who had fond memories of using these machines in their younger years and spent a lot of time to get them working in a modern day setting.

I got to see a UNIVAC 1219 in action, which was my favorite part. A close second was [Paul Rickard](http://twitter.com/paulrickards)'s vintage plotters drawing modern generative art, a working Teletype terminal and a series of ATARI machines through the decades.

The realization that computers were machines built using physical, analog parts. Seeing the internals of the UNIVAC really drove home the realization that our magic digital devices are really just powered by bits of plastic, silicone and wires.

The tactile experience of computers. Almost all the computers and devices at the exhibit was working and we could interact with them. I lost count of the number of different keyboards we marvelled at, each with different layouts and character sets. You could tell that these machines were lovingly restored and cared for. Every now and again, you'd hear a visitor compliment an exhibitor on the condition of their machine, "you've had this for 20 years? it looks almost brand new!"

The interactive nature of the exhibit also made me realize quite quickly that I have been conditioned to use modern day GUI and that knowledge does not always transfer over. Some elements have persisted over the decades, such as the recycle bin, which we saw on an instance of [GEOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GEOS_(8-bit_operating_system)), an operating system fron the late 80s. It was also 'windowed' in the sense that there was a single window for traversing directories. However, unlike a 'Back' button that we're used to, you had to click on a corner of the window that resembled flipping back through the pages of a notepad. It's a little hard to describe with words, so here's a screenshot:

I was also fascinated by the modularity of systems. When I think of computers, I think of laptops now. I think of computers as single, whole units with irreplaceable parts. But for the most part of history, that wasn't the case. We saw industrial computers with slots that could be customized with circuit boards. Input and output devices could be swapped out. My favorite was seeing an iPod used as a substitute for a cassette tape for data storage hooked up to a [SCELBI microcomputer](http://www.scelbi.com/). As long as the device can output to a 3.5mm audio jack, it works! This gave me a great satisfaction for the persistence of interface standards. Side note, the concept of the size of a microcomputer was a little different back in the late 70s than it is now: The SCELBI was a about the size of a small microwave oven.

Another example of a hack, or co-opting of technology was the use of MIDI connectors to enable a multi-player game, on Atari ST machines at [Peter Fletcher](https://twitter.com/recta_pete)'s exhibit. MIDI stands for Musical Instrument Digital Interface and was initially used to connect with instruments that made sound, but an engineer somewhere got creative and used it to create a networked multi-player first shooter game, MIDI maze. For something that was built on co-opted technology, the game worked super smoothly and had negligible latency.

One of the loudest, but also most fascinating was a working Teletype Model 33 ASR exhibited by [Hugh Pyle](https://twitter.com/33asr). If you've never used a Teletype machine before, just imagine using a CLI, but on a typewriter that prints your typing as well as the CLI response to paper. It wasn't too different from using a terminal on a modern computer, but you couldn't hit backspace or undo. I was initially curious about why they were used as terminals, when this was also around the time that punchcards and CRT monitor terminals were introduced. Turns out that these machines were readily available due to their historical use in newsrooms to transmit text, and they turned out to also be great as computer terminals. The model we saw also could read/write punch tape as a way to store data or your programs.

Imperfections of the physical machines that add to the charm of it. Tiffany and I remarked on the quality of indicator lights on the UNIVAC. This was prior to the widespread usage of LEDs, and the glow from the [neon](http://mccworkshop.com/computers/comphistory1.htm) bulbs. LEDs would yield brighter and more even lights, but one could argue that the beauty of these vintage machines lie in the nature of the limitations that they were built with.

All this history is being driven by people who lived in that era of what we now know as vintage. I asked each exhibitor why they got into vintage computing and received different, but truly wonderful responses. They all had stories to share about their first time with the computer, teletype, whether they were introduced to it as a child, or worked with it as an engineer before they retired. Computers  What happens when that generation ends? What will we see 50 years from now at the Vintage Computer Festival in 2070? I am already imagining tables of Nintendo devices and pre-USB C Macbooks finding their places in those exhibits. Will the software persist? The web is remarkably great at backward compatibility, will that always be the case? I am always wary of standards or 'best practices' that are not built on browser APIs. Will we see virtual machines and Docker containers running copies of our favorite operating systems and games? Will the experience of using it be the same without the accompanying hardware?

Also, perhaps there will be more women and people of color at VCF 2070. It's hard to deny that computing was once a priviledged luxury, only made available or marketed to a specific demographic. In my time researching early computer history it was hard to not be discouraged knowing that there are so few people like me. I *want* to celebrate that history and creativity that gave us technology that we have today, but it is also disappointing to not see someone like me that I can look up to and celebrate.



