---
title: Scents 2021
layout: post
published: false

---
 
Several years ago, I wrote a series of posts on personal stories of perfume and scents. Every now and then it gets picked up by a friend or two. Most recently, fellow tech person Sumana shared it on Metafilter. A handful of readers left some really lovely comments. [^2]

The perfume market and my personal experience with scent has changed quite a bit in the past few years, and I thought it would be fun to do a little update.

### Elephant in the room
As I'm writing this now, we are squarely within the pandemic era. I still wear masks when I leave my home, even outdoors. I can't tell if it's the learned fear of crowds that makes it hard to enjoy evening walks anymore, or if its the missing dimensionality of outdoor smells. 

At a perfume boutique in SOHO, a store employee hands out fragrant tester strips behind is full face respirator. Customers hesitantly pull their masks down to sniff the latest summer cologne. I do the same, but I stop myself from inhaling too much, who knows what else is in the air?

Behind this mask, I can no longer smell the lavender booth at the local farmers market, neither can I smell the lush bouquets of peonies that grace us each spring. I find myself relying a lot on memories of scent to fill this gap.

I make sure no one else is around (or at least 6 feet away) when I pull my mask down to smell the shampoo selection at the pharmacy.

I've been surprised at how the perfume industry is still going strong. Perhaps it's the newfound fascination for new sensory experiences when trapped at home. Or maybe it's because we are now faced with the real possibility of forever losing out sense of smell.

### What if it is gone forever?
When news of COVID-19 causing temporary and sometimes long-term loss of smell, I was deeply horrified.

> Ms. Hansen’s first symptoms was a loss of smell, and then of taste. Ms. Hansen still cannot taste food, and says she can’t even tolerate chewing it. Now she lives mostly on soups and shakes.

For others, recovery is incomplete. My friend reported tasting most roasted food as burnt rubber. I have to wonder what it is like for a perfumer to lose their sense of smell.[^1]

I know I would be devastated for sure. The fear of losing my sense of smell amid fear of death was too much to bear. Even if I did get better, would life be worth living if food and scents no longer bring pleasure?

I found a handful of comforting comments by folks who have lost their sense of smell pre-pandemic -- and who have learned how to cope with it. I can't find it now, but I read a comment of a reader who had lost their sense of smell in adulthood. She reassured us that it was still possible to live a fulfilling life without smells. You just learn to enjoy the other types of senstation available to you.

I know what it is like to live temporarily without scent. When I catch colds, I usually almost always lose my sense of smell, mostly due to nasal congestion. It is then when the use of smell that I take for granted becomes most obvious. Smelling the inside of a cup to make sure I got the milk out, deciding if a piece of clothing is due for the laundry


https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/02/health/coronavirus-smell-taste.html?searchResultPosition=3

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/03/22/health/coronavirus-symptoms-smell-taste.html?searchResultPosition=2


https://slate.com/technology/2008/07/the-miseries-of-losing-the-sense-of-smell.html

Whenever I felt the slightest bit ill, I'd desperately inhale in whatever smells I can in my apartment. Just to confirm that I still could smell, if I wanted to. The inside of the fridge, my kitchen sink, the smell of my pillow -- anything to reassure me that I wasn't truly falling sick. Often I would remember that oh yes, I did indeed smell something earlier... I definitely smelled the onion I was chopping, and I did smell the dirty dish rag by the sink, I had remembered that it was time to bleach it again. These thoughts gave me comfort amidst the anxiety.

Every morning I wake up grateful to still have sense of smell, but not in a good way. I feel as though my attachment to smell has hiked up to some sort of anxiety over losing it at any moment.

I have a friend who has resigned to contracting COVID-19 at some point in their lives (despite vaccinations, as we have seen enough breakthrough cases) it is now endemic. But I still cannot accept that reality. Many folks eventually recover their sense of smell, but what if I don't?

### Seeking nostalgia
I find myself thinking a lot about the past. Regret selling off old fragrances. In a bid for minimalism I was too eager to let go of physical attachments to the past. But I'm starting to think that collecting items from different times in your life is not a bad thing. Experiences shape you in the present and honoring them is not a bad thing. If anything I learned that trying to forget and to supress just delays having to process them to a later time. The internet makes it easy to recover lost or discontinued scents.


### Home smells like...

I travelled home to Malaysia to see family again after a long while. I saw our childhood home, where both my parents still lived. Our front yard has a small patch of dirt where my mother has grown her lush garden.

Gardens are full of amazing scents and flavors. Jasmine, mulberry and 'magic berry' (more on this later) were some of the delights to be found. Gardens and neighborhood parks smell like freshly rained on dirt. The smell of decaying leaves in the tropics is unlike in North America.

We'd rub Thai basil leaves between our fingers to smell them as we admire our neighbours' growing garden of edible vegetables, the eggplants still green.

I learned the smell of kittens, animalic and haylike. How soft their fur, how liquid their bodies feel in my arms.

Our food is ever fragrant. Freshly grated coconut over pandan, sweet and creamy is everpresent in our sweets. Malaysian food is thick with warm spices. Malay 'sup ayam' with its melange of cinnamon, anise, cardamom and cloves makes for a fragrant broth that reminds me of home. The added garnish of 'daun sup', literally 'soup leaf' and cilantro adds a refreshing green herb finish.

I never realized just how fragrant my home country is until I left it. Now I have a newfound respect for it.


https://gizmodo.com/over-a-million-americans-may-have-permanently-lost-thei-1848082265

https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamaotolaryngology/fullarticle/2786433?guestAccessKey=6c370061-4714-4661-8aff-4a3018110eab&utm_source=For_The_Media&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=ftm_links&utm_content=tfl&utm_term=111821


----

1: I found an article about professional sommeliers who have lost their sense of smell due to COVID-19:https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/19/world/europe/france-covid-smell.html

2: https://www.metafilter.com/192854/it-smelled-good-but-in-my-mind-it-already-belonged-to-someone-else